Because honestly, it's very clear that my face will be the primary selling vehicle.
I mean, frankly, in all honesty, just look at you guys and look at me and it's very clear, you know, who people would rather look at, right?
I mean, it's just, it's an easy one.
My only requirement for your face on this podcast is that you let the hair go.
Like, don't bottle that shit up.
It's all ponytail up.
Yeah, let it flow.
Let him see the flow, John.
Yep.
I mean, it's freaking Samson Long over here.
Just kidding.
Don't lose your power.
Right, right.
I'm working on it.
I'm working on it over here.
When you started here, you had big, you had really long hair, didn't you?
Yeah, I had a man bun, you know?
Right, that's what I thought.
Okay.
It's coming back.
Why can't we say man bun?
Why can't we just say bun?
I don't know.
I think it's supposed to be, you know, incendiary.
It's supposed to humiliate the man with the bun a little bit.
Which is still a question for me.
What's the aversion to the man bun?
I still don't get why man bun...
You're absolutely right.
It's always a sort of derogatory thing.
Like, people say to me all the time, like, oh, you could have a man bun, or oh, is that
a man bun?
And it's always derogatory.
And I'm always like, why is that?
I just genuinely don't understand why it's derogatory.
I think the derogatory thing comes from also, like, men are traditionally not supposed to
care about their looks that much to cultivate that kind of hair.
So it's like, if you care enough to, like, really grow it out and take care of it, like,
you have, you know, you're a narcissist.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Yeah, it's totally gendered.
Yeah.
It's kind of funny, because I was, what song was playing?
Oh, it was that Bob Seger song.
I'm not a Bob Seger fan, but it was just playing on my Spotify.
And it's the, all those same old cliches.
Is that a woman or a man?
You know the song?
Yeah.
And I was thinking about, and there's another song where, like, tucked my hair up under my
hat or whatever.
And in terms of the long-haired version, and this is from the 1970s, but when people thought
of men with long hair, they equate it with, like, looking like a woman.
But I just don't think that it applies anymore, right?
Like, men with long hair, I don't think that, at least in terms of the cultural circles
that I travel, I can't imagine, for instance, today, 2020, I can't imagine someone
saying, people say to me all the time, like, damn, your hair is long, damn, it's long.
But no one ever says, it looks like a woman, ever, right?
Like, you are so far from looking like a woman, and I think, I think maybe that's the one.
Right.
A giant Shrek woman, right?
And I think they've definitely dissipated, but they haven't, you know, you, this is what
we were talking about with the norm thing, right?
It's just, you put a few of those things in a line, so it's not just long hair, but it's
long, well-kept hair, long, well-kept hair put into a bun, long, well-kept hair with,
say, like, someone...
If you're too manicured, yeah.
Yeah.
That's the, that's the issue.
So, basically, what you were saying a moment ago, Nate, was that there's no one less manicured
than us.
Yeah, you don't have to worry about these critiques, John.
I think you're safe.
Yeah.
Being unmanicured, yeah, it signals, signals masculinity, or a certain version of masculinity,
a pretty dominant version of masculinity.
Right.
Okay, well, I, I, again, I still think that these methodological conversations, the sort
of how we're going to organize this, are really, really important, you know, not simply as
a prequel, but as constitutive of, and that's where, you know, again, things like, hey, why
don't you pick a passage before we come in that we want to start with, or, or whatever
else, as ways, and, and I think it's a challenge to us, like, each time, let's try to come up
with different ways of starting, and different ways of, and it doesn't mean every single
time we meet, we've got to have a different thing, but, you know, periodically, every few
sort of conversations, let's have a different plan, which is like, okay, Nate's going to
lead this one, and, and however, whatever that means, and whatever that looks like, and
then Nathaniel will lead, you know, and, and then sometimes, of course, we can just
do like we're doing right now, which is no one has a particular lead, and we just take
off where we left off last time, that's fine, too, but, I mean, it's a kind of cool exercise
to figure out, okay, you know, the three of us are meeting Hegel, how can we make our
two hours together, you know, do something different?
To go back to one of your initial points, John, it's like that inventing the method of reading,
or method of engagement, method of interpretation, there's a sense that that's, like, really the
only question, like, for, for life, for scholarship, for, for, you know, being in the world, because,
I mean, if you, like, the text we've been reading, Hegel, the dialectic, that's all it's concerned
with, deconstruction, that's what it's concerned with, how do you, how do you read? All of their
writings are about how to read, and how to write, and how to engage with the world, so, I mean,
yeah, there's a sense that that's, like, a, a perennial, you know, interminable question
that needs to constantly be turned over, again and again, so.
And for, for me at least, the issue is constantly the necessity of experimenting with structure,
and not presuming it, right? Like, because that's the, part of the problem with
higher education, or education in general, is that, by and large, we just presume the structure
in the format, which is, teachers goes in, talks, Q&A, you know, like, the structure is kind of a given,
and, and that's, to me, especially in this forum, that's something that's possible of, like,
well, what else could we do? Like, what, what's another way of organizing this that's, that's
different than just, like, teacher, go in and talk, student, take note, ask occasional question,
you know, and, and, and, and the necessity, or the importance, maybe not the necessity, but the
importance of, of inventing different mechanisms, not just taking a mechanism that you saw in a video
somewhere else, and applying it here, which, by the way, has all kinds of value, right? That's a
valuable thing, to try it around. I mean, that's where it's, like, for me, the lesson is always,
just try different, just, I mean, experimentation in the sense of, try different structures, like,
all right, this week, we're doing whatever we're doing, and we're going to have a structure that's
completely different than last week, when we were doing something else, you know?
I think a lot of it's going to have to do with how we model our interactions with each other,
and I, I think to, I assume this is the same for the both of you, that my favorite moments of
teaching in the classroom are when, one, or, like, leading up to the teaching in the classroom is,
one, is when I'm grappling with the text that I'm going to teach, and there's a lot of thinking going
on there, and then, two, when I get questions that force me to think and re-engage the class,
and then pull other people, like, I don't particularly, like, sometimes, but don't particularly like the
antagonistic questions, and, or, the stupid biographical questions, because then I feel like I'm just
reciting information on them. I like the, the questions of clarification or explanation, like,
I don't get what's going on here, can we pause, can we look at this more carefully, because then I can
go through, and we can actually do close readings, and I really like the ones, like, you know, that
obviously that are synthetic in some way, like, hey, here's this thread, what's going on here,
I see this kind of thing, what do you think, and so we can, I, if, if this is also just not, like, a model of, of, um,
thinking and a model of reading, it's also a model of thinking with other people, because that's,
we're not just dealing with three people dealing with the text, we're dealing with each other as well.
Right, the collective. I mean, genuine engagement, like, that's, that's what's always feels best for me in the
classroom, when people are actually invested in the conversation, and I'm, I'm talking well enough,
and people are understanding me, and bouncing ideas off of me, and stuff, like, that is, but the thing
is, that's kind of rare, at least I think in the context of higher education, you know, broadly writ,
it's the professor professes still. I think still that's basically the standard format, even with all
these new pedagogical tools and strategies, you know, and the whole, like, you can mess around with
structure in the classroom, and it can be really helpful, or just totally useless, like, with, like,
in terms of the whole Socratic, uh, sort of seminar style, like, if you have the wrong group of people,
that will be a dead, dead conversation. Um, so the genuine interaction where people, everyone's engaged,
I mean, that's, that's valuable in and of itself. That's generally how I felt about my grad classes
for the last, like, year and a half, or two years, is, and, I mean, the one in the fall that, that you
were in, Nate, like, it was just, eh, like, they're just, people weren't bringing, you know, I mean,
you, this is not, it's obviously not a personal thing, because there were those moments, especially,
like, those last few weeks of the class, like, you got really invested, and you were, um, right,
with the Nietzsche, with the Lewis and stuff, yeah. Right, right, but, I mean, by and large, I just, I just felt
like that class was just kind of, me, it's just, it was just me talking about stuff, and, and, and now,
look, the class was on the book that I'm working on, so it's understandable, it's not entirely, but I wasn't,
I mean, that, you know, we deviated from that after week three, and it just became this, like, much more standard
version of teaching, and it was so passive, and the, the spring, the class that I just finished in the
spring was the same way, it was just such passive interlocution, you know, like, people would ask
informational questions, or their clarificatory questions, clarification's a little bit better
than informational, but still, um, and, and what it wasn't was, like, what we're doing, which is, like,
we all have projects that are pretty, our intellectual itinerary that are directly connected to this,
And we're doing this because we want to think through it, and then to think through it with other
people, I mean, this, this is that basic question of, like, you know, I've always, I've always felt
like the idea that just anyone can sign up for my classes is kind of bullshit, right, like, I mean,
I understand the necessity of it from an institutional perspective and all that stuff, but, and not
because I'm special, but just because, you know, it would be nice if one class every couple of years,
you'd say, like, okay, you have to apply to get into this class, and that means I'm going to interview
you, or I'm going to, we're going to talk, or I'm going to read something of yours beforehand before
you're in the class, and, uh, you know, and, and for instance, grading would be less about, uh, what
you get at the end, and more about, like, art, can you stay in, right, like, it would be the Hunger
Games, like, you got to prove your worth every fucking week, man. Yeah. You're going to vote
people off of the island? Yeah, man. Survivor. I mean, look, the best classes as a, as a grad
student that I was in, which was, it was much more likely to happen than the undergrad classes
that I teach, um, was just, you know, I think the way of saying what we've been talking about
is just in the language of engineering. It's like, we're, we're engineers of concepts. The only
two questions I ever care about is, how does it work, and what does it connect to, and what
does it do to the thing it connects to? The only three questions that I, that I ask. And,
and that takes a lot of work. That's not information, right? That's, so, but I think that maybe,
maybe we can, I don't know, lean on that metaphor a little bit, or, you know, we're taking it apart.
There is, but, but I mean, it does seem to me that, that you're right about the, that even
if you have sort of newfangled methods and you encourage collective and presentations and
bullshit like that, which I just fucking hate, but, um, it, it really is, there is a kind
of deferential sense to the status of the professor as the one who knows. There are times in the
classes where I, I mean, I, I think I'm pretty explicit. You guys are taking class with me.
I think I'm like, hey, I don't really know this. I'm thinking through this. Like, this is a
question for me. And I really try to foreground that. It's just so like, okay, let's throw some
shit out. Like, let's, what's your guys' impression? And it does, it just falls flat for the most part,
you know, because they're, they're just so internalized as to, even when John says he's
just thinking through stuff and not the expert, we still kind of think he's, you know, hiding his
expert card somewhere. And I'm like, I'm really, I'm really not, you know, but, or at least I don't
intend to, but it's the institutional position. It's not me or them. It's just like, how does
one, how, how does one get educated without the notion of a, of a master?
I've been trying to, I've been dealing with that same problem in almost those exact same,
that exact same language. And what I've been trying, because I also know that there's no way
that I can, you know, not take on the institutional position of the master. So one, one thing, one
way I've been describing my mastery is like my mastery and my expertise is mostly situated
in my ability to not rely on what I know and to not worry about, you know, following useless
routes. And it's really nothing more than like a willingness to engage and, uh, and be moved
by the text. And that's, that's what makes me better at this than you not, because I have
a bunch more knowledge than you or that I have.
Because you can do this without a willingness to look stupid.
Yeah.
Because like undergrads really, I mean, there are undergrads that you get or that I get,
you know, I'm sure you guys, that are like way better at this than most graduate students.
Right. I mean, I'm not saying, but even, I mean, I've had undergraduate classes where you've
got, you get four or five of those folks in a 25 person class and that makes for a great
class. Right. Cause it changes the dynamic because I, they really buy into this idea like,
okay, this isn't about us memorizing and regurgitating information. This is about us thinking through
shit. And, and it can be in, in many ways, I feel like the undergraduates can, because they're
not invested in professionalization question, that they can bracket the mastery things. Sometimes
some individuals, right. In some classes, not as a general, but, uh, but even more than graduate,
because grad students are like, well, this is a guy who's going to be on my committee and writing
me a letter of recommendation and all of those necessary and important institutional things.
But the result is that they don't feel like they can really, you know, it's like, it's like the,
the, the deist thing of like, how powerful is the God that says, I'm not going to be God
anymore. Right. Like, no, no, no. This is really not about me grading you. You guys just talk amongst
yourselves. It's the ultimate God move is to say, I, I, I'm not going to be God. Right. I'm going to,
I'm not going to be, I'm not going to play the God role. You're like, well, you just, you just amped
it up a thousand fold. Right. Like, yeah. So yeah. I mean, people are, students are afraid to engage.
I think that's the main, uh, you know, uh, roadblock for, for a lot of these classes. It's just the,
is the fear of engagement, the fear of looking stupid, you know, and that happens undergrad,
graduate level. And if you can somehow get like four or five students, like you said, to break
through that basic barrier, then you're fine. You're, yeah, you're off to the races, man.
We need to replace the, um, the wisdom of the Delphic Oracle from, you know, I know,
or like know yourself, or I know that I don't know to, uh, I, I'm okay with being stupid
or looking stupid. It's true. I mean, it's true. Like, I mean, I did in the theory,
the undergrad theory class, whenever I teach it, I'm like, and I, and I, this is a kind
of mantra I use in there. It's like, you guys are all stupid and you're all going to say
stupid things. Right. Like, so let's just start from there. Let's just, so in other words,
try to lose the fear of stupidity because stupidity is going to happen. Right. It's
and you're going to save things. Right. That's, I mean, absolutely. And, and I'll, I'll tell
you when you're stupid and I'll make fun of you and I'll make fun of me and I, you know,
like I'm, I'm still, I'm not pretending that it's not stupid. It is stupid and it's uninformed
and stupid, but that's not a, that's not a deal breaker. And that's not even a prevention.
That doesn't prevent us from doing the kind of thing that we want to do. Like,
please say the stupid thing and, and get okay with, you know, your, your, your, uh, classmates
not thinking that you're, uh, uh, a master because that's how you become a master. You
know? In fact, if, if you didn't say the stupid things, why are you in the class? Yeah. Right.
Right. I mean, clearly you've, yeah. Yeah. You should be allowed to be stupid. The thing
is like, you should be required to be stupid. Right. Requires. Yeah. Yeah. But my, like
at least when, when I'm teaching undergrads, like my, you know, as we've been talking, like
my obsessive focus on contingency and uncertainty, that can be very disturbing for students. Oh yeah.
Yeah. It can be freeing and it can open up conversations and make things interesting, but
it'll make a lot of people uncomfortable as well, you know, which whatever, I guess that's
fine. Yeah. Yeah. Well, I tell, I mean, I know Nathaniel's heard this story, but I don't
know if you have to, like I did, this is probably 12 years ago. I did an honors college class
and they, for the honors college, like you have to propose a topic and then you go in and
teach it and whatever, whatever. And so I proposed, I don't remember what I proposed, but I went
in a class and I just sort of decided the week before, I'm like, I'm going to do a class
on contingency and I'm going to make them experience it. Like we're going to live contingency.
And here's what that means. I'm going to go in on the first day and I'm going to explain
like, there are no rules to this class. There's no reading list. There's no, there's no nothing.
And one of the things that we have to do is we've got to come up with that. We're a group
of 10 people sitting around this table. And so we have to decide what are we going to do?
And what are we going to read? And I can help provide resources, but you know, it's not me.
It was, I'm not joking. The worst class I've ever taught. I mean, it was, it was an abject failure.
Like every part of it failed. Um, that they did buy in, they were frustrated, they were irritated
that I wasn't really teaching them. There wasn't like every, every student in that class. I mean,
it was terrible. The whole semester just sucked. And, and after that, I actually sort of went back.
That's when I really started, you know, my classes. Now I have structure and it's like,
I'm going to go in and I'm going to talk and that's the structure. And that's how it's,
that's how it's going to work. And, you know, generally speaking, people are way more comfortable.
They might be bored with that. They might be uninterested in it, but they're comfortable with
that. Students are just not okay with the idea of saying like, hey, what do you want to learn
about collectively? They're like, uh, this is your job. Yeah. This isn't my job to figure
this out. It's your job. Right. It's your, it's the teacher's job to bring the content to
the table. And, uh, yeah, my, my attempts to undo that were at least in that case, wildly
unsuccessful. Nobody learned anything. I'm not going to teach a class like that again.
But this, I mean, this is where just the, the, the incentives, um, for students are all backwards.
Like you would expect that to work in an honors class, but the mechanisms that produce honors
students tend to be rigid adherence to a pre-established structure, right? Like creativity gets
squashed. And certainly creativity is a level of structure, right? They can be, they're very
creative if you tell them the task on which they're supposed to be creative. But if the
creativity involves coming up with a task. Yeah. Well, they're dutiful. Any honor student
is mostly dutiful. That's their, that's their like default sort of a position. And that's
what academia breeds is dutiful, dutiful people that are ready to follow rules.
We burned an hour on methodological shit. So let's talk a little bit about Hegel because
he has nothing to do with methodological stuff.
Nothing.
Where did we leave off? Did we leave off at like 13? I think that's what we're starting
with. And we're, we're effectively talking about the, um, he's, he's dealing with the sort
of emergence of a new paradigm that is, I think we put it last time as both the sort of the
culmination of the old paradigm and the genesis of the first one. And so this is 13. I mean,
I was poking around 13 is mostly focused on the sort of, um, back and forth between the
new and the old paradigm and the sort of their differential positions and the emergence of the
new over the old.
So a couple of things jump out for me there. Um, one is, I mean, this is just in, just in,
as you're reading through it, so I haven't theorized this, but yeah, obviously I'm writing
this book on style right now. And one of the things that I'm having to grapple with is the
relationship between style and form. Um, and there's a fairly simple way of defining it,
which is, you know, um, form is the sort of larger level architecture of say an essay,
whereas style is the sentence level, right? So style is the individual or the particular
and form is the sort of larger level. Um, but I, I, that always just seems too simplistic
to me cause I think you can talk about the style of an essay too, right? Like, so, um, but,
but here the relationship, and this is going to come back again in a moment actually, this question
of the articulation is that the, the content changes, you know, the specificity of content,
but also even more the articulation of form whereby distinctions are securely defined.
And that, that issue of form is that which serves a kind of unifying principle for the dispersion
of content, right? So that, that what form does is, it doesn't matter the level, essay, book,
you know, world or whatever. It, it's just that what form is that, is the term for a link
between the particular and the general, you know? It's, it's the, it's, so, so the contents
are the particulars, um, but form gives you that hinge. And I started to, uh, think a little
bit about why Marxism has always been really interested in form. And, and that makes sense
now, right? When you think of form as the hinge, you know, I mean, it, it makes sense even
in Aristotelian like hylomorphic terms, which is whatever the content is, if it doesn't have a form,
right? That content is just, so it's like, there's steel, that's a content, but the form of a sword
makes a difference versus some other, you know, some other form. And so that, that, that formal
quality, which is the unifying, uh, apparatus. And again, the, the consistency with which the notion
of unity is, is really important, uh, to maintain while still emphasizing the particulars, you know,
um, you know, that, that's, that just struck out for me there is why he would be so interested
In saying the form matters, you know? Right. Yeah. I mean, I think the, the evolution really matters
here as well, because, you know, both the old and the new paradigms have a form, right? But the,
the major difference is, is that the old paradigms like form, I think, as you said, is the thing that
allows specific kinds of contents to emerge, right? And in the old paradigm, that form has more or less
exhausted itself. It has produced as many particulars as it's probably going to produce. And it's run into
situations where it cannot produce consistent particulars about the thing. Right. And so the
emergence of this, of this new form, you know, it can, we'll get to this in the next section, but
it's now able to articulate new particulars, but it hasn't done so yet. Right. And so there's this
tension. Yes. Mason, it's, there's this tension between the old and the new that the, the old paradigm
has this wealth of knowledge and content that it can mobilize about any what sort of thing, but there's
a lightness and a creative capacity to the new form because it's able to create new contents out of
old, both old ideas and, and, um, content, but also the new uninterpretable stuff that, um, it's
encountering that the old paradigm couldn't deal with. Right. And it's going to remake all of this
stuff as well. And what's so strange about some of this language, like, especially at the end of
13 is that we're basically, we have this development from unscientific consciousness to scientific
consciousness that he's laying out, but scientific, like science for Hegel is the incorporation of the
self of subjectivity. So it's not, it's not the same, uh, standard of, of objectivity that you would
normally associate. So basically we have a movement from no reflexive orientation towards the self to a
complete incorporation of the self in the system of knowledge. Like, so, so that whole idea of simplicity
and returning to simplicity, like it's not simply a, like we were talking about this a little bit last
week, um, about the, you know, the simple concept of itself when the whole returns to itself and
becomes the simple concept of itself. Like that's actually the goal, I think for Hegel. Yeah. Like it's,
it's not a critique of simplicity or simplification. It's like, that's when you've achieved a level of
reflexivity.
You'd say there's two different kinds of simplicity, right? There is the, there's the primary simplicity,
which is just the sort of, you know, the, the self unity, but then there is a better simplicity,
which involves that sort of, uh, uh, return the alienation from self and return to self.
But I think you're right. It's, it's actually interesting. You could say in that passage right
there that this is an anticipation of the thinking of quantum mechanics, right? That you have to have,
you can't separate the observer, uh, principle, right? Yeah. Well, if you want to do that.
I mean, so reading it just right there, the, the, the stuff about the, um, yeah, self-reflexive
understanding and the pure eyes was what I was focusing on as well. And it's like, it takes us
back. This might be a way of, um, making Hegel's teleology more interesting in that, um, a teleology
is sort of, um, imminently proposed. So, you know, the simple genesis of some kind of pure style,
right? Contains within it, its own telos, which is to remake the world in its image. And then not
only remake the world in its image, but also become self-conscious of the world that it has made,
right? So that first simplicity is just the capacity of, of that style or that form to do the remaking.
And there's no knowledge there, right? It's pure production. It's unreflexive, like appropriation.
I make it and it is, or I, I appropriate and it is remade, but then it's only in these sort of
louder stages that what has been made becomes self-reflexive, right? Which is both the sign of
its maturation and it's like, um, um, uh, what's the word I'm looking for? Not atrophy, but it's...
Death, death is the, the, the next thing, right? I mean, it's the, the moment that will lead to the
birth of the, of the new thing. Decadence. That's what I was looking for. Yeah. Well, yeah. Okay. Well,
and the, and the understanding for Hegel, which is that primary form of consciousness before self-consciousness,
that's what we usually think of as like scientific knowledge. It's knowledge about the world,
but that, that about is what's the problem for Hegel. It's, it's not, it's not reflexive
enough. It's not turning back, incorporating the self. Um, so yeah. Well, it made, it maintains
the, you know, right. Yeah. The distinct subject object dichotomy, you know, it's like, I know
the world. That connection. So like, imagine. Oh, go ahead. Oh, I was just going to go to
quantum physics as well. It was, it was that, you know, like imagine because I would think that then
that like, okay, humans create this paradigm or remakes the world and they become aware of what
they've done, but it has to remake the eye in this process as well. So imagine sort of, um, quantum
physics, not just being a technical, um, uh, uh, uh, language of describing the world, but it actually
remakes the way that the human sees themselves in the world to the point where the distinction
between the human and the non-human becomes commonsensically at the level of commonplace
untenable. Right. And that would then be like, I am now the eye that sees my eye as not like
uniquely human. It's not a distinct, I don't have to reason myself there. Yeah. I don't have to think
myself there. I don't have to jump through these hoops. This is, you know, uh, Michael ended up texting
me or emailing me about Rorty and, you know, he, he talks about these paradigms. It's like,
it's just like at a certain point you stop describing things one way, you start describing
something the other way. So he gives us this example, you know, um, you can imagine a world
where we stop saying, I feel pain or I'm in pain. And you just say, my C fibers are firing.
At least for me, like this kind of thinking really does only emerge maybe in the, in the 1700s,
1800s, maybe a little bit before Hegel, but this kind of like ruthless, dialectical, non-linear,
you know, uh, auto deconstructionist kind of thinking doesn't emerge till, you know, uh,
like before, like sort of industrialization. Like, I don't even know, like who's, who's the first
person to start thinking like this? Rousseau. Um, I mean, you know, like Hegel, Rousseau,
Kant, maybe a little bit before that, but like that kind of writing was just not present. Um,
at least for me, like when I read, go back and read like Francis Bacon, who's considered sort of
like one of those fulcrum figures, it's totally, it's linear thinking. It, there's no reflexive kind
of orientation toward, it's not writing about writing. When you get to Hegel, it's writing about
writing. That's it, you know? And so, well, that's true. I was going to say, I was going
to say Plato. I mean, again, like Derrida, you know, is obsessed with Plato. And I think of course
you can, you can read into everything as a text. So you can, everything deconstructs itself,
but I just, I don't know, at least for me, there does seem to be a break. Like, you know,
how Foucault kind of frames it in The Order of Things? Like there's just this, there's this break
in the 1700s where this emergence of thinking is totally dissimilar from what comes before it.
Yeah. Like everyone kind of accepts a level of continuity between either from the Greeks
up to the present or like some variation of that, you know, even Hegel endorses that in terms of his
recovery of Aristotle. But, um, but I, you know, I'm, I don't know. I'm just a little interested in that
Foucaultian sort of quasi Foucaultian notion that there is an absolute rupture in the form of
thinking. I mean, it does seem to me that, hey, I mean, my experience, Hegel is the first one who,
um, ruthlessly accepts a sort of like self-consciousness of that, right? That like,
certainly the auto deconstruction thing is always happening, but to then say, all right,
now I need to account for this auto deconstruction. That, that does seem to me to be,
you brought up Bacon, for example, and his sort of, his ruthlessness is taxonomical. He's going to
like lay everything out. And my favorite thing of highlighting with, with Bacon is like, he keeps
on running himself into problems. He can't, he can't keep his categories straight and they're
constantly undoing each other. And of course he's probably going to think that just because
they're inadequate, I'm saying like, no, because they're right. Self-transformating, the more you
run them out, the more they self-transform. But exactly. That's where I tend to think of it less
historically and, and more stylistically shocking. But, um, but, but here's sort of what I mean by that
because I feel like, I mean, first of all, reflectivity here is thought at the level of
self-consciousness, right? Like that's what it means. It means that being, you know, being aware
of itself is what we mean by reflection here. But that, that to me is the whole project of Socrates,
right? Like the whole, the whole apparatus of the Socratic dialectic in that case is you're not
sufficiently self-conscious of the concept of virtue such that you think you're enactment of these
actions as virtue. Whatever the, whether it's virtue or knowledge or whatever it is, it's always about, um,
pointing out the failure of self-consciousness of his interlocutors, right? Their, their lack of attention to the kind of
conceptual grounds or whatever. He doesn't talk about it as self-consciousness, but that's the thing.
I would contrast that with, as you guys are talking about Bacon, who I haven't really read, um, I, you know,
to me that sounds like Aristotle, right? Aristotle to me is the great taxonomizer who, like you guys
were just saying, I'm, one of the things that's really cool for me, the, one of the few things that's cool
about actually reading Aristotle is that his categories don't work and he sees it, right? Like
he's, he's developing these sort of distinctive taxonomies and then they, like at certain moments
will go like, ah, this is kind of like in the rhetoric, like, well, this is kind of fading into
ethics. So let's just leave that aside and let's go back and then, oh, this is kind of fading into
politics. So let's leave that aside. You know, like, um, so, so to me, maybe rather than thinking of it as a
historical break, we might think of it as sort of flavors of thinking, style, styles of thinking
that emphasizes the necessity of the constitutive necessity of reflection or self-consciousness
as a component of thinking versus one that doesn't, you know, that doesn't see self-consciousness
because I think the taxonomizers don't see self-consciousness as necessary, right? Like they
don't, or rather it's just one thing among others. It's not, you know, right. Well, the,
the failures of representation and language for someone like Bacon, that's a problem to
be overcome. That's the project. One, one day, maybe one day we'll invent a method of reading
or writing or a language that will absolutely transparently capture how the world works.
And that's, that was his goal for like scientific technology. And that's sort of, I mean, in some
ways that's kind of what he predicted with the enlightenment and all that. The thing is when you get
to Kant and then Hegel that it's no longer a problem. That's the, the answer. The answer is the problem.
It's not, we're not getting past the issue of not being able to capture the world that can, that gap
between conceptuality and its reference. That's the only thing. Like there's no way of superseding
making that or getting better or getting over it, you know? So you have to build it in and that becomes-
Right. You have to build that into your, your system. That's a, that's now a dimension of the
thing, not, not a limit of the thing, but an internal component of it.
And another thing worth pointing out in this passage, at least for me, is the kind of democratic impulse
behind it, you know, because I mean, this is, we're still, I think we're still residually talking
about the intuitionists, which by the way, I went back and I did a little bit of side stuff to find
out exactly who he's talking about for the intuitionists. And it is like the earlier romantics,
like Schelling and Novalis. So the guys that he's writing in response to, which I got then kind of
interested in those, in those figures a little bit. And, you know, one of the, the recurring motifs
in, in those thinkers is the link between motherfucking philosophy and the, and art, right? Like
their, their desire to sort of link these, which of course, of course, a perennial, like it's a
constant for a certain type of thinker, you know, that, that, that relationship becomes, I mean,
think of Heidegger in poetry, you know, the, the, the sort of later Heidegger, you know, it's a,
it's a recurring question of this, this, this, again, like the con, the conceptual versus the
affective, or I mean, however you want to figure it, but the attempt to kind of wed those things.
Whereas here, it seems quite clear that one of the problems for him with the intuitionist line is
that it's, it's too private, right? It's too idiosyncratic and dependent upon masters,
dependent upon the specialists who know versus those that don't. Whereas for him, reason,
what reasons gives you is, you know, without such articulation, science lacks universal intelligibility
and gives the appearance of being the esoteric possession of a few individuals, right?
So that's that intuitionist sort of like, you, you feel it. And so the claim here, but by the
way, this is an interesting claim, right? Like, at least to me, obviously others have made it, but
like the premise that feelings are something that everyone has, you know, or rather something that
are, that everyone has, but are private and sort of located at the level of the individual. Whereas
thinking is something that everyone has an equal capacity for. And I'm like, how the fuck? I mean,
I don't know. As long as I've been alive, that seemed to be the reverse, you know, that, that thinking
that is actually the purview of a fairly small number of, of, of people. It's not public. And, and
he's not, I, I get that he's not saying it's, I mean, what struck me as interesting here was the
democratic impulse simply because of how Hegel is usually taken up as exactly not that, right? You know,
Right. But it is this interest. I see it. I've also seen it like the New Critics, but the, the reason
for new critical emphasis on not author biography and authorial intention is precisely because that's
too private and only specialists have access to that. Whereas we want a public to be able to
appreciate the poetry and what the public can appreciate is in, you know, in that case, but here
what the public or the, what the so-called every man could appreciate is reason. Like reason is just,
is just there for everyone to see, um, as opposed to it being its own esoteric, right? Like, so it gives
the appearance of being the esoteric possession of a few individuals because it's a feeling, but a thought
somehow is not an esoteric possession. I mean, it's just kind of a weird, uh, disjunction to me.
Yeah. I'm going to temper that a little bit just because of the timeline of it, because it seems
that the difference between esoteric and exoteric is really just time and diffusion, right? So this
sort of like at the nascence of, of some new paradigm, it is quite esoteric, right? Because it's only
articulated by a few and it's only managed to re-describe a little bit of, of the world. But as
the world is remade by this new style, this new form, it incorporates and appropriates everything,
including the demos, right? Which means then that like, like the, I don't think that the democratic
impulse here is that every person could articulate a technical theoretical account of what's going on,
but more that they're commonplace, commonsensical, you know, what the, what everybody knows has now
been dominated by this thing, right? In the same way that like, you know, our, the everybody knows that,
you know, individualism and freedom are good, right? Which was not the everybody knows,
you know, 300 years ago. That was a pretty, you know, esoteric idea.
It seems to me that it's still kind of a response to, you know, back on 10, right?
We were talking about the, the, you know, intuitionist. And again, we haven't read, we haven't read those
folks. And, and, you know, I spent 10 minutes or whatever looking around, but, um, you know,
the intuitionist is a sort of pre-romantic kind of ideology of like the experience of, and that, that
something, something like that is, is very, very localized in the particular people who experience it
and who can make others experience it. Whereas it does seem to me that for him, what distinguishes
science and what science has to offer is that it's not localized in a sect or in, uh, you know, that it,
it, it can become available. So like the intelligible form of science is the way open and equally
accessible to everyone. And consciousness as it approaches science justly demands that it be able
to attain rational knowledge by way of ordinary understanding, which is to say rational knowledge
is that is that is the, is the field that anyone can get into. Anyone can't get into the esoteric,
uh, uh, uh, experience of feeling the oneness with God, right? Yeah. It takes a very particular,
uh, um, training or, or relation in order to do that. This, I don't think that the intuitionists and,
and this can be incompatible, right? Because you would have to think of something like romanticism
as a style that reinterprets the world, right? And insofar as it's capable of dominating and
appropriating that it begins as, as I mean, I think there are two layers of esoteric, right? That you're
talking about, John. I think that the level of esotericism that you're talking about is a little bit
different than here because, you know, the esotericism of say like a newly founded romanticism.
Yeah, that's right. Yeah, you're right. He's talking about the new thing is still esoteric and
it's not yet exoteric, right? So you can imagine an exoteric romanticism that has become the common
sense of an entire people. And now the sort of both the, the, the ordinary understanding and the
self-reflexive understanding. Like I just think of myself as this being that has esoteric experiences
of the real, right? But it would have to be, but it would have to be not just the feeling. It would
have to be the self-conscious awareness of the feeling as a feeling, right? No, I think it would
have to be the self-conscious awareness that the feeling is produced in these esoteric ways.
Does that make sense? What's the, I don't get the distinction that you're making.
Because I think that the esotericism of romanticism becomes a species of the movement of absolute
spirit, meaning that, right? So that the esotericism of the, of the romantic feeling is not incompatible
with the exoteric romanticism as a paradigm, right? So, so like, so what can be self-reflexive and conscious?
Right, but it's got to go, it's got to go further, right? It's, it can't stay, I mean, I think that the
argument is that it can't stay in the realm of the esoteric. It has to, it has to move into the realm of
reason. It has to move into the realm of consciousness.
That might be, that might be the limit point of romanticism, right? Is that it moves into that
direction and then it hits that limit point. And that's what brings about Hegel, right?
The, the, yeah, the, the privileging of, of, uh, intuition, affect, particularity for Hegel is like
a false universal. It's, they're, they're claiming to be, they're claiming to be only focused on imminent
relations. But in that claim for Hegel, they're ignoring their own transcendental tendencies. And so that's,
that's the transcendentalized term that they're not actually aware that they're making or, you know,
creating.
I think you have to like, you know, what I'm trying to, what I, what I'm trying to do is
describe romanticism from Hegel's perspective. Like saying, y'all thought you were doing this,
but this is what you were actually doing because one, it was a stage, a dialectical stage, but then
two, your esotericism, you know, was actually a part of this bigger process.
And so everything that you thought was general was actually just a specific part of this larger
movement.
Well, the refusal of transcendence for Hegel is just masking that operation. Like, you know
what I mean? Like, so that's why those figures are constantly incorporated, not because he's
a transcendentalist or an essentialist, but because these are, these are historically viable terms
that still have force and weight in the way we think. So he's, you know, he's incorporating them
into the system, you know, whatever you want to call it, performatively. Whereas people that,
you know, Spinoza, whoever, the intuitionists, they're claiming to be absolutely anti-transcendental,
but in that move, they're, you know, they're smuggling in the God term somehow.
Yeah, I mean, I don't know. I mean, I just, for me, I'm still stuck on a level of simplicity,
not in an interesting way, but just sort of, you know, that feeling something strongly just
isn't enough for Hegel, right? It has, it has to be conscious of itself as feeling strongly. And in order
for it to, so, so it is both that feeling strongly. Yeah. I mean, I think that you're right. That's the
nascent part of the new paradigm, right? So it's, it's the, it's the, the acorn that has yet to, you
know, bud. But I think for him, if you just stick with that path, you're not going anywhere, right?
Like you're, you are just going to be reproducing that again. That's, I mean, part of the problem
with this evolutionary thinking is that it discredits some things as being not contributing
towards evolution, right? Like, yes, it's important that romanticism, we're calling it, he doesn't
call it, but what he's calling the intuitionist and that this esoteric kind of moment, uh, it's
important that it happens. Um, it's also important that it, that you move past it, you know?
Exactly. Yeah. And so maybe it's a matter of emphasis, but here, I feel like the emphasis
is fairly clearly on moving past the motherfucker, right? Like that only what is that clear?
Anything would have to be moved past, right? So I think what I'm, one of the things that
I'm really trying to grapple with is, are there dead ends for Hegel? And, and when I'm
not being generous, I think like, yeah, he's saying that romanticism is a dead end. And what I'm
trying to do at the moment is to try to imagine romanticism, not as a dead end, but something that
self transforms into something else. So, you know, the, like precisely because of some of those
irreconcil, like the irreconcilability between, you know, romanticism makes it so that that feeling
cannot become self-conscious because that would undo itself. But that's very clearly a necessary step
for Hegel. So that becomes the limit point at which a new nascent, uh, paradigm is, right.
Well, you could, so you refutes itself. Go ahead, Nick. Go ahead. Well, just to, to put it in like
sort of slightly Derridian terms, maybe like, so like if, if imminence is conceived as immediacy,
which I think is sort of what Hegel is critiquing the intuitionist as conceiving it like that,
whereas like, so poetry or affect, this is an immediate, you know, relation to the world.
Like when you're, right, right. Sense certainty. This is, that would be like a necessary error
in Derridian terms in the pursuit of like self-presence or whatever. Like, so in the inescapable
pursuit of presence or the re or reality or the thing in itself, this intuitionist tendency to,
you know, make these claims about imminence or immediacy, that's a step along the way to
self-consciousness or absolute spirit, but it's, you know, it's not quite there yet.
But see, that's the, that's the, I mean, I go back and forth on this as a, as a rhetorical
guy. It's the frustration of Hegel, um, is that he can always shift from saying, um, it's
between like saying, this is a component of the architecture of the movement, um, or, which
is to say like, great, necessary, you know, developmental, or he can conversely say like, this is a sticking
point because it's not everything else in the system. That he can always switch from the kind
of architectural perspective to the local perspective, uh, as, as one sees fit. And that's
where you could never, I mean, you could never pin him down in that regard insofar as, you
know, he's an idealist. So let's just say that, right? Like, so as an idealist, he believes
that consciousness is the thing that is necessary, right? And so then, of course, then we have
the materialist response to it. And then we have attempts to wed the, you know, idealist
and materialist. So, um, do you locate Hegel as an idealist, meaning that's a historical moment
in the maturation of thinking? Or do you locate Hegel as the thinker that tells you that idealism
is just a moment in the maturation of thinking? And, uh, it, like I said, as a, as a, uh, and
it, it just, to me indicates the extent to which I am invested in the notion of position
taking is because I go like, well, you can't fucking have it every way you want it, you
know, Georgie. And, and I'm like, but the only reason I'm saying that is because I want to
argue against it, right? Like I want to contend. The only thing that's driving that impulse in
me is to be, is to contend with it. Um, which of course would be his point, right? You
know, um, so, but when you, when you think of it at the level of system, I totally get
why the people I know who've gotten into Hegel, like lose their fucking minds, right? Because,
because anything is incorporable into the, like literally anything, it's absolutely unimaginable
to think of something that would not be incorporable in some way by, yeah, because just the shifting
positions can be done all of the time and always. And this is why the Hegelians can't do anything
but reiterate Hegel, right? I mean, that's what I would say. They can't, they don't make
anything. Well, they just reiterate, they, they reiterate like, oh, that's just a moment
of this, or this is just another moment of that. And they're not wrong on Hegelian terms, but
they're also not interesting. Well, right. I mean, to be a Hegelian, like strictly speaking,
there's nothing less interesting than that. I mean, it's like to be anyone, a Lacanian or any
of that. I mean, it's like, if you're, if you're a disciple of one of these people, you're not going
to produce anything worth reading. Like, so that, I mean, but, but also the compulsion to be
post-Hegelian is so strongly felt. It's the same thing. Yeah. Yeah. It's just another step in that
process. Right. That's right. Right. Um, although there is, I mean, this is where we get, I was just
trying to rescue this notion of telos, but there's also the, the, the telos governing all of these
little telos and you know, it's unavoidable because it's so totalitarian, right? It's totally, yes.
Right. The, the, the, the function of the whole here just consumes everything.
And so that's to me, that's where Deleuze makes sense, right? It's a kind of, that's why his, uh,
antipathy towards Hegel, uh, makes a lot of sense to me. It's like, this is the real danger.
It's because it's, I mean, in a certain level, so it's because it's fucking right about everything.
Right. I mean, and it's created the conditions in which it's right about everything. Yeah. What's
that? It's created the conditions in which it's right about everything. And it can't not be like
there's, there's no, because it can, because it can toggle between a moment in the architecture
and the specificity of that moment, because it's able to toggle between the movement of spirit
and the moment of spirit's movement, right? That it can go back and forth. It can, there's
literally nothing that it can't assimilate. Yeah. And that, that totalitarian impulse is certainly
there. I mean, that's a completely viable critique. It's, it's all throughout the phenomenology.
You can't discard that. So, I mean, Deleuze's, Deleuze's career long attack makes perfect sense.
I mean, like you need Deleuze's reaction against Hegel. Now, that being said, I do think, you know,
at least in Nietzsche and Philosophy, his reaction, the, the force of a reaction, the, the kind
of tone of it almost says more than the actual conceptual work. It's like the, the, just the,
you know what I mean? Like, well, that's right. But that's right. Because so what's necessary
in order to interrupt it would have to be a rethinking of the concept, right? Or a rethinking
of the conceptual. So, I mean, because at the level of the concept, this literally explains
everything, right? I mean, we're fucking seven pages in, right? And, you know, 13 paragraphs.
I'm like, this is like, this explains everything. And, and I just, I flash back to, I remember
a lecture that Charles Scott gave back when I was in grad school where I used to like, I'd
fill up my big thing of whiskey and tea and just go listen to Charles fucking talk because
I loved listening to him talk. And he's a Heideggerian. I mean, he, I remember one moment in a class
on something. And he just started, someone asked him a Hegel question or something. He started
talking about Hegel. And he talked for 40 minutes about the eloquence and, or rather about the
elegance of, of the Hegelian system and his, like how he got involved with it and his experience
with it and the things that it could do and how mobile it was. And on the one hand, frustrating
because you couldn't put it down. On the other hand, magnificent if you can sort of just live
in there and whatever, whatever. And so it was this, it was this 40 minute, 40 minute like
elegy to the wonders of the Hegelian system at the end of which he goes like, you know,
so, so I was, I found myself just entirely amazed and fascinated by this extraordinary thing
that Hegel had made, but I never believed it. Right. Like it's just like, it just seemed
too fucking like scary, right? Like this too, that everything, it really, I mean really, like
not just, you know, in some sort of dumbass philosophical way, but like this is the sort
of appropriation machine par excellence. And here's how you can't break it by saying it's
wrong. You can't. That doesn't break a fucking thing. In fact, what you have to do is you have
to give it correctness. You have to give it accuracy. You have to give it reason. And then
you say, ah, reason is a problem. And therefore you don't, but, but without going back to affect
or intuition or some pre, right? Like that's where you've got to go somewhere else with the
concept, I think, you know, in order to respond to this because it's, it's just right.
Well, it's, it's right, but it's a problem. You know, it's like, it's, it's just this constant
problem. And that's why figures like Foucault and Derrida, they have these ominous claims. Like
maybe we're still in the shadow of Hegel. Like, I don't know if we're ever going to, you know,
supersede his thinking. And it's like, they all have these little like tiny quotes like that.
And it's always like, oh, this is, this doesn't sound good for us, for us as a people to be still.
Yeah. Right.
This is the totalitarianism of identity politics.
Absolutely.
It's like, you want to operate on a very concrete stage. That's right.
It both, it both creates and appropriates everything.
Exactly. Yeah.
Now, and it's, and it's fascinating. Like I find myself in thinking with this, I, I'm really
intrigued. I mean, I'm really, really intrigued and I'm drawn and, and yet I do feel like constantly
I'm just like, it just, I don't know. Like it's, it's the kind of experience that I have.
I don't like horror movies very much. And the, the, the worst of the horror movies for me are
the torture, what they call torture porn, right? Like the saw and those kinds of like, I, I just
had this, you know, I just feel gross. Um, and I don't know. I mean, it might be interesting
to psychoanalyze me on that, but who cares? I just, it just feels gross. And that's the
feeling that I have is I'm both incredibly fascinated and drawn to the specifics and it just feels
disgusting to me. You know? Yeah.
Like really, like deeply, like deeply and not, not something directed at Hegel per se, but
just like, uh, just like, I, I actually think this is, this may well be the pinnacle of Western
thinking. It really, really may be like more than Deridoff, more than Deleuze. It really
may be how, like the only way of, uh, of thinking how rationality plays itself, you know?
Yeah. And it's so committed to the whole kind of symptomatology where you cannot, like Zizek
Basically says, like, you live your symptom. I mean, it's like you cannot escape certain
compulsions, tendencies. And it's like the one thing, the one thing that I think, uh, you
know, is, is basically just wrongly attributed to Hegel is this idea of the master subject.
It's really easy to read that into, into this work where, but it's like absolute spirit is
not mastery. It's, it's the, it's, you know, basically the recognition of your own finitude.
It's, there's nothing, there's nothing about spirit that ever masters itself. It can only
find comfort or some sort of maybe temporary solace in a reflexive, you know, recognition
of its own dissolution. So it's like the whole, the master side, there's no master of anything
in this, in this system. All you can do basically is reflect back on your own errors and, and
misrecognitions and capacity to be wrong. Now, an obsession with that can obviously lead you
to, you know, it's a myopic sort of narcissistic thing.
But also, but also right. I mean, it's, it's also right. Like, I mean, that's the thing. That's the
interesting thing about the toggle is that you're also always right as a moment in, by right, I mean,
as a moment in the development of spirits, you know, unfolding.
You're always correct. No matter what you say, you're correct because you're, you're articulating
a symptom.
That's right. And how could you, how could you not do that? That's where the sort of Nietzschean
symptomatology looks pretty different than that. Although frankly, like, I mean, what does Nietzsche
add? He adds, so there's not just one progression of spirit. There is life affirming and there's
life deprecating, right? So he gets two, right? That's, that's what Nietzsche adds into that paradigm
is that there, there are certain types of thinking that aren't just moments in the development of
spirit. There are moments in the deterioration of life for Nietzsche. Uh, you know, not for
Hegel. For Hegel, every moment is a moment in the elaboration of spirit. How could it not
be? You know? Um, yeah, there's no picking sides for Hegel. You're, you're always on the
side of spirit, no matter what you want to do or what you're trying to do. It doesn't
matter. And that's the fascinating, that's the fascinatingly compelling part is that's why
I said when I, when I switch out of that, uh, argumentative, what I call like an argumentative
mode where it's like, when I see him toggle between the system and the moment, you know,
the general and the particular, and he toggles and I'm like, well, hold on a second. You can't
have it both ways. And I'm like, well, what's making me say that? Because of course you can
have it both ways. And as, as someone sort of admiring and working through in an admiring
way, the system, I find it, it's just amazing to me. And like I said, we're seven pages in
guys. Right. Um, so, and I feel like you look at this five minutes, you've effectively look
like you're watching a horror film. Right. Yeah. I mean, it's very scary. It would be
better if Hegel were not right. I mean, that's, that's for sure. Yeah, it would
be, yeah, it would be better if you could be like, well, what he doesn't consider is X.
I mean, it would be better if you could be like, well, what he doesn't consider is X.
I mean, it would be better if you could be like, well, what you're doing. Yeah, it would
be better if you could be better if you could be better if you could be better if you could